The extent of which factor was most crucial in the fall of Napoleon is a heavily debated subject
among historians, with their being many possibilities in the context of his downfall. Such as
his personal over-ambition, military failures, strengthening opposition and public unrest
being four examples. Recent interpretations from historians lean more so in the theory that
Napoleon's over-ambition was the catalyst in his fall from power. However, it is possible to
argue against that idea.
Historian Adam Zamoyski’s view is that Napoleon’s downfall, amongst other reasons, was
predominantly brought on by his own mistakes and possible ego brought on through power.
Stating throughout his writing that it was Napoleon’s desire to control Europe and prove
himself as a strong emperor that was his greatest weakness. As an example of this, Zamoyski
states that, “When Czar Alexander began to defy him, Napoleon felt so threatened that he
gathered the greatest army the world had ever seen to make him stand down.”1
In which he
references the Russian campaign of 1812, which many historians have stated was entirely
needless, used only as a display of his empires power to either intimidate other countries or
prove to Napoleon himself and the French public that he was a “real emperor.” 2 not wishing
to expose the “underlying frailty” 3
that Zamoyski believes is present beneath Napoleon’s
military successes. Debatably, Zamoyski is correct in his argument that Napoleon’s downfall
was his own fault, for example the over-ambitious plan of the continental system, that would
see countries under the Napoleonic empire have a ban on trade with Britian. This plan led to
both the Russian war, which saw heavy casualties from the French soldiers, as well as the
Peninsular war with Spain. Which was also a comprehensive failure on Napoleon’s part, not
expecting the guerrilla warfare used by the Spanish military. Both wars arguably unnecessary
and used to fuel Napoleon’s need for success and power. However, it is possible to argue
against this being true. For example, Napoleon had no way of anticipating the exceedingly
rare tactic, “scorched earth” employed by Kutuzov in the Russia campaign, the blame more
1 Adam Zamoyski; Napoleon, The man behind the myth, Harper Collins, 2018
2 Adam Zamoyski; Napoleon, The man behind the myth, Harper Collins, 2018
3 Adam Zamoyski; Napoleon, The man behind the myth, Harper Collins, 2018
on the strength of the opposition than Napoleon himself. Overall, Zamoyski’s view is
reciprocated by the evidence of needless battles and poor planning from Napoleon for
questionable gains such as building a dynasty or employing the Continental System amongst
Europe, therefore I agree with the contents of his argument and believe that Napoleon’s
ambition was a catalyst in his downfall.
French war general Paul Thiebault wrote of his opinion regarding the greatest of Napoleon’s
war failures, in the form of the battle of Leipzig in 1813, in which whatever French power was
left in Prussian dominated areas got destroyed by a multiple-nation coalition army against
Napoleon's empire. Thiebaut states that Napoleon’s past military tactics that had worked up
to the Peninsular war were no longer applicable in warfare that had multiple armies fighting
at once. For example, Thiebault states, “Napoleon had never until then had more than one
opposing army to deal with at one time; now he had three”4 as well as “he could not attack
one without exposing his flank to the others.”5
 which both suggest that Napoleon’s past
tactic of flanking was no longer as successful as it was in the past. Going to extremes by
stating “The man was annihilated by the presence of space.”6
 which despite hyperbolic, was
true in the terms of Napoleon being defeated through a lack of flanking opportunities he
revelled in during past battles. Arguably, Thiebault is correct in pointing out the military
failures being a factor of Napoleon’s downfall, as most factual evidence supports this view.
For example, the Russian campaign was not successful due to the tactics employed by
Kutuzov and how they countered Napoleon’s fast marching tactics, the same with the
4 General Thiébault, a divisional commander at Leipzig, discusses the battle in
1813 in The Memoirs of Baron Thiebault V1: Late Lieutenant-General in the
French Army, translated by Arthur John Butler
5 General Thiébault, a divisional commander at Leipzig, discusses the battle in
1813 in The Memoirs of Baron Thiebault V1: Late Lieutenant-General in the
French Army, translated by Arthur John Butler
6 General Thiébault, a divisional commander at Leipzig, discusses the battle in
1813 in The Memoirs of Baron Thiebault V1: Late Lieutenant-General in the
French Army, translated by Arthur John Butler
Peninsular war. In both wars flanking wasn’t an option, leaving Napoleon with no other
options and ultimately failing. However, it is possible to argue against this point, as these
military failures were purely due to Napoleon’s poor judgement and over-ambition, less of a
military failure, instead a failure of the emperor. as the general’s had no say in waging war
against Russia and Spain. To conclude, Thiebault’s view is supported by the evidence of past
military losses. However, I believe that the military failures were in turn caused by Napoleon’s
own failures, and therefore is not the most crucial factor in Napoleon’s downfall.
Once again using general Thiebault’s source a discussion in his personal memoir, it is possible
to interpret that he blames Napoleon’s downfall on the rising power of the opposition against
his empire alongside the military failures. Thiebault references the coalition, mainly consisting
of Russia, Prussia and Austria, against Napoleon in the battle of Leipzig. Thiebault lists the
number of troops and their corresponding generals used against Napoleon in this battle,
“Bernadotte to the North with 160,000 men, Blücher to the east with 160,000, Schwarzenberg
to the south with 190,000,”7 which defines the true strength of the opposition Napoleon was
against in this battle. Furthermore, Thiebault mentions how this coalition army used space to
counter Napoleon’s famous tactic of flanking through march speed, writing that “[Napoleon]
could not turn the enemy’s flank as at Marengo or Jena.”8 perhaps presenting the idea that
the opposition had evolved their own tactics to counter Napoleon’s. Thiebault writing that
“The man was annihilated by the presence of space.”9 Showing a clear rising strength amongst
the opposition, directly leading to his downfall. This claim is supported by contextual
evidence. Russia had gone through a series of military reforms following their defeats to
7 General Thiébault, a divisional commander at Leipzig, discusses the battle in
1813 in The Memoirs of Baron Thiebault V1: Late Lieutenant-General in the
French Army, translated by Arthur John Butler
8 General Thiébault, a divisional commander at Leipzig, discusses the battle in
1813 in The Memoirs of Baron Thiebault V1: Late Lieutenant-General in the
French Army, translated by Arthur John Butler
9 General Thiébault, a divisional commander at Leipzig, discusses the battle in
1813 in The Memoirs of Baron Thiebault V1: Late Lieutenant-General in the
French Army, translated by Arthur John Butler
Napoleon in the past such as Marengo. The Czar ordering a mass conscription, raising over
one million troops to disposal by 1812. As well as this, many officers following the battle of
Borodino had knowledge of how the French attacked. However, it is possible to argue against
this evidence, with the heavy losses that the Grande Armee faced following the Russian
Campaign as well as the Peninsular war, it would not be difficult to purely overpower
Napoleon’s army through sheer numbers through a coalition. Shifting the blame from
strength of opposition, to past military failures. Overall, I believe that although the opposing
militaries of Russia, Prussia and Austria had seen advancements, Napoleon’s past military
mistakes were mainly to blame for the failure at the battle of Leipzig that conclusively led to
his downfall and abdication.
Once more using historian Zamoyski’s source, he says that Napoleon had a higher expectation
of the public's loyalty towards him as emperor than what was present, another factor of his
downfall alongside the previously mentioned personal mistakes he made. Zamoyski, in
relation to an attempted coup during the Russian campaign in which there were claims of
Napoleon’s death, writes. “On hearing of his death, nobody reacted as they would have had
he been a real monarch—by saying ‘the Emperor is dead, long live the Emperor”10 which
defines a distinct lack of loyalty to Napoleon himself, instead to the spirit of an emperor.
Infact, Zamoyski continues to state the public were already “proclaiming his son’s accension
to the throne”11 when he arrived back to France. Which only bolsters this argument that the
public was not truly aligned to Napoleon. That his trust in the public to protect him was illfated and mistaken, being a contributor to his downfall as a leader. This opinion is backed up
by evidence, Napoleon had sanctioned mass censorship of journalistic writing and literature
up to his downfall, with only a few newspapers remaining by 1810. Although there is no
physical proof due to the censorship itself, this incentive to censor the news outlets may bring
up the idea that Napoleon was being critiqued by those in the media, often reflective to the
public's opinion. This evidence, alongside an attempted coup in his absence supply a sense
of public unrest amongst the empire. However, this evidence can be refuted with alternative
points. For example, Napoleon’s vast educational reforms providing the public with an
improved system, giving more reasons for them to stay aligned with Napoleon. Such as the
introduction of a curriculum, baseline secondary education and a more meritocratic system.
Allowing the children of less wealthy families to succeed under his rule. Overall, I believe that
10 Adam Zamoyski; Napoleon, The man behind the myth, Harper Collins, 2018
11 Adam Zamoyski; Napoleon, The man behind the myth, Harper Collins, 2018
Zamoyski’s source regarding public opinion being Napoleon’s downfall is justified by the
evidence supplied yet is also put into question by his reforms that would improve the publics
opinion to him, as well as the coup being disproven and ended very shortly after it began.
Therefore, I believe public unrest is not the most key factor in Napoleon’s downfall.
To conclude, I believe that although military failures of the Grande Armee was a key factor in
Napoleon’s downfall. Though fundamentally, napoleon’s own poor judgement and mistakes
were what truly led to his fall from power. The Russian campaign, arguably the most
predominant factor in napoleon’s downfall, could be blamed as a military failure. However, I
believe that the Russia campaign was truly a mistake of Napoleon’s, not the militaries.
Napoleon’s need to show his empire’s strength to the world backfired, and only showed his
weakness to the opposition. Although a coup did break out during this campaign, forcing
Napoleon to travel back to France amidst a failing battle, this show of public defiance was
only another result of Napoleon’s personal failure. Expecting a higher sense of loyalty from
his people than present, showing a complacency as emperor as mentioned in Zamoyski’s
source. As well as these factors, the strengthening opposition against Napoleon was a
predominant factor in his downfall, for example the battle of Leipzig. However, I believe that
the Russian campaign displayed Napoleon and the empires mortality to other countries,
perhaps opening the door to attacks and coalitions against him. Therefore, I believe that
Napoleon’s own mistakes were his downfall. 
